The Protocol and Requirements to replace AOT with JIT via soft-fork (#695)
ScorexFoundation/sigmastate-interpreter: docs/aot-jit-switch.md

 skip-pool-tx    | skip pool transaction when building a new block candidate 
 skip-accept     | skip script evaluation (both costing and verification) and treat it as True proposition (accept spending) 
 skip-reject     | skip script evaluation (both costing and verification) and treat it as False proposition (reject spending) 
 Validation Context | a tuple of (`Block Type`, `SF Status`, `Script Version`)
 SF Status       | soft-fork status of the block. The status is `active` when enough votes have been collected.

### Script Validation Rules Summary

Validation of scripts in blocks is defined for each release and depend on _validation
context_ which includes type of block, soft-fork status and script version. We denote
blocks being created by miners as `candidate` and those distributed across network as
`mined`.

Thus, we have 8 different validation contexts multiplied by 2 node versions
having in total 16 validation rules as summarized in the following table, which 
specifies the action a node have to take in the given contexts.

> Rule#| SF Status| Block Type| Script Version | Release | Validation Action 

Reviewer: Validation Action is not defined.

Author: added definition

3    | inactive | candidate | Script v2 | v4.0 | skip-pool-tx (cannot handle)
4    | inactive | candidate | Script v2 | v5.0 | skip-pool-tx (wait activation)
||||
5    | inactive | mined     | Script v1 | v4.0 | R4.0-AOT-cost, R4.0-AOT-verify 
6    | inactive | mined     | Script v1 | v5.0 | R4.0-AOT-cost, R4.0-AOT-verify 
7    | inactive | mined     | Script v2 | v4.0 | skip-reject (cannot handle)
8    | inactive | mined     | Script v2 | v5.0 | skip-reject (wait activation)
||||
9    | active   | candidate | Script v1 | v4.0 | R4.0-AOT-cost, R4.0-AOT-verify
10   | active   | candidate | Script v1 | v5.0 | R5.0-JIT-verify 
11   | active   | candidate | Script v2 | v4.0 | skip-pool-tx (cannot handle)
12   | active   | candidate | Script v2 | v5.0 | R5.0-JIT-verify 
||||
13   | active   | mined     | Script v1 | v4.0 | skip-accept (rely on majority)
14   | active   | mined     | Script v1 | v5.0 | R5.0-JIT-verify 
15   | active   | mined     | Script v2 | v4.0 | skip-accept (rely on majority)
16   | active   | mined     | Script v2 | v5.0 | R5.0-JIT-verify 

Note the following properties of the validation rules.

> 1. Rules 1-4 specify creation of new candidate blocks _before_ soft-fork is activated. 

Reviewer: Please note that block creation is not a part of the protocol, and miners can do whatever they want here. Even more, possibly some miners are doing custom block assembly right now. 

This it would be reasonable to split consensus and non-consensus procedures, by e.g. moving block assembly rules into an appendix.

Author: Yes, but on the other hand it may be easier to look at the whole set of rules in one table. I will move you comment in the test and make this point more clear.

3. For any given tuple (`SF Status`, `Script Version`, `Release`) the _equivalent_ `ValidationAction` is
applied for both `candidate` and `mined` blocks. This proves the consistency of the rules
with respect to the change of the block status from `candidate` to `mined`, both before
and after soft-fork activation.

4. Each rule `i`, where `i` is an odd number, defines a `Validation Action` performed by
a v4.0 node. Each such rule is paired with the `i+1` rule which defines `Validation Action`
performed by a v5.0 node. Any such a pair `(i, i+1)` of rules have `Validation Actions`
which are either the same or equivalent with respect to the [Equivalence Properties of
Validation Actions](#equivalence-properties-of-validation-actions). This proves
consistency of validation actions across v4.0 and v5.0 nodes.

5. After SF is activated (`SF Status == active`), both AOT-cost and AOT-verify
implementations are no longer used in `Validation Action` of v5.0 nodes. The only context
where v5.0 node needs to use AOT based verification is given by Rule 6, which is to verify 
a v1 script in a historical mined block before SF is activated. 

> However relying on _Prop 3_ we can replace Rule 6 in a new v5.0.1 release with the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However relying on _Prop3_ we can replace Rule 6 in a new v5.0.1 release with the
```

Reviewer: Prop 3 is not defined before.

Author: Changed it into url which refers to the definition.

#### Rules 1 and 2
 _Handle v1 script in candidate block when SF is not active._
 Ensured by _Prop1_ and _Prop2_ both v4.0 and v5.0 nodes use equivalent AOT-cost and
 AOT-verify and thus have consensus.
 Release v5.0 will contain both AOT and JIT versions simultaneously and thus can _behave as v4.0_
 before SF is activated and _behave as v5.0_ after SF activation.
 
#### Rules 3 and 4
_Both v4.0 and v5.0 nodes reject v2 scripts in new candidate blocks when SF is NOT active._ 
This is ensured by _Prop5_ which is motivated by the following reasons: 
- v4.0 nodes have no implementation of v2 scripts, thus rejecting them altogether both in
  input and output boxes of new candidate blocks
- v5.0 nodes behave like v4.0 nodes and are waiting for majority of nodes to vote, thus
rejecting until SF is activated

#### Rules 5 and 6
 _Handle v1 script in mined block when SF is not active._
 Similar to rules 1 and 2 but for `mined` blocks. 
 
#### Rules 7 and 8
_Both v4.0 and v5.0 nodes reject v2 scripts in `mined` blocks when SF is NOT active._ 
Similar to rules 3 and 4.

#### Rules 9 and 10
These rules allow v1 scripts to enter blockchain even after SF is activated (for backward

> compatibility with Apps).

Reviewer: Apps not defined

Author: changed "Apps" to "applications"

of v5.0 nodes since it cannot handle v2 scripts. In the same context, the majority of
nodes uses the new JIT based implementation of ErgoTree interpreter `R5.0-JIT-verify`
procedure for costing and verification.

### Equivalence Properties of Validation Actions

In order to guarantee network consensus in the presence of both v4.0 and v5.0 nodes
the implementation of `R4.0-AOT-verify`, `R5.0-AOT-verify`, `R4.0-AOT-cost`,
`R5.0-AOT-cost`, `R5.0-JIT-verify` should satisfy the following properties.

_Prop 1._ AOT-verify is preserved: `forall s:ScriptV1, R4.0-AOT-verify(s) == R5.0-AOT-verify(s)` 

_Prop 2._ AOT-cost is preserved: `forall s:ScriptV1, R4.0-AOT-cost(s) == R5.0-AOT-cost(s)`

_Prop 3._ JIT-verify can replace AOT-verify: `forall s:ScriptV1, R5.0-JIT-verify(s) == R4.0-AOT-verify(s)`

_Prop 4._ JIT-cost is bound by AOT-cost: `forall s:ScriptV1, R5.0-JIT-cost(s) <= R4.0-AOT-cost(s)`

_Prop 5._ ScriptV2 is rejected before SF is active:  
`forall s:ScriptV2, if not SF is active => R4.0-verify(s) == R5.0-verify(s) == Reject`

### Other Notes

- Since we are going to fix some bugs, the behaviour of v1 and v2 scripts in general not

> required to be precisely equivalent. So while old apps are supported unchanged, new apps

Reviewer: Sounds contradicting to Prop. 3.

Author: Added the following clarification:

This is because `R5.0-JIT-verify` supports both v1
and v2 scripts so that `R5.0-JIT-verify(Script_v1) == R4.0-AOT-verify(Script_v1)` due to
[Prop 1](#equivalence-properties-of-validation-actions) and `R5.0-JIT-verify(Script_v2)`
may be completely different language. Of cause, we don't want it to be _completely_
different, in particular to ease migration.
